Yes, could you tell us your full name? My name is
Bonnie Sue Shelton Stadelman.
And could you tell us when and where you were born? I
was born in Boulder, Colorado, June the 18th,
1934.
as far back as you can remember with grade school,
if you wish, and bring it on up to the time that you
acquired your Ph.D. Well, I attended elementary
schools in Toledo, Ohio and Waterville, Ohio. I
went to high school in Waterville, Ohio my first
two years, then transferred to Maumee Valley
Country Day School where I had a scholarship. From
there, I went to Earlham College, which is a Quaker
college in Richmond, Indiana, for two years. I
transferred to Ohio State where I got a BS in 1956.
Then I taught school for two years in Durham,
Connecticut. Even though I had a bachelor's
degree in social science, I taught biology and
math. Then I got my master's degree at Western
Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio in 1960. I
expected that with a master's degree I'd be able to
teach history, but the coaches still had that
field all sewed up. So I ended up in Chalmette,
Louisiana teaching biology and general science.
Then I started to Tulane in fall of 1964, and I got my
PhD in American Colonial History in August 1969.
Then what did you do after you received your PhD?
Well, I was already employed here on the staff. I
see. I see. When and why did you come to A&M to teach?
I was married at the time, and my husband was on the
philosophy faculty. I see. And I sort of haunted
Dr. Nance's office. And the Latin American
historian, I believe his name was Dr. Ewan, or
McEwan, had a heart attack and collapsed in his
office. And so they needed somebody in the middle
of the year. So I fit right in in January of 1968. I
see. And what were your primary teaching
responsibilities at this time? I've been a
perpetual freshman teaching History 105 and 106
exclusively except for one semester when David
Morgan was on leave and I taught Colonial American
History. And what was your normal teaching load
during the whole year by semester? When I started
it was 12 hours and then when Dean Maxwell came as
the head of liberal arts. He shifted it to a nine
hour load. I see. And what did you teach in the
summer time? Did you teach one semester or two
semesters in the summer? The first couple of
summers I taught two courses, one term or the other
in summer school. Then there were a couple of
summers I didn't teach at all, by choice. And then
Let's see, it must have been the summer of 1972 they
gave me one course one summer term and one course
the second summer term. Because I was at the bottom
of the totem pole and was lucky to get any summer
teaching at all. Then the last two summers I've
taught two courses the first summer term. Now, at
any time while you were here, was your work
criticized in any way? No. No, I never was praised,
but that was par for the course. Nobody else got
praised either. But there were strong hints, of
course, that faculty were expected to publish
articles. But I published an article in the
William & Mary Quarterly, which I felt was pretty
good feather. When
did you first learn that you would not be granted
tenure? What was your first inclination that you
were going to have problems with the tenure? It
never crossed my mind that there would be any
problem until April of 1972. I was on the verge of
getting a divorce, and I wanted to tell Dr. Nance so
that he wouldn't find it out by the grapevine or
read it in the newspaper. And I was very
overwrought emotionally, and I could hardly talk
to him. And I told him about my personal affairs,
and he chose that moment to unload the fact that not
he, but some members of the department felt that
people who only taught History 105 and 106 should
not be given tenure. And I was in such a state that
the import of what he was saying only began to
penetrate. Well, let's get something clear right
now. Do you have a choice in what you teach? No.
Never? No, not at all. So that's kind of unusual to
tell you about that. Well, it made it sound as if it
was a diabolical plot on my part. to refuse to teach
advanced courses when actually everybody wants
to teach advanced courses. But you were never,
never given the opportunity to, except for the one
time when Dave Morgan was on leave. But there was a
prevailing atmosphere that everything would
come to those who waited patiently, that their
turn would come, that you served your
apprenticeship. Yes, I understand that. I see.
Well, then after this, do you remember when this
conference was? April, 72. Then after that, then
what? Could you give us sort of a chronological
breakdown of what was happening? Well, it was just
a matter of waiting. But then in the fall, I got a
letter saying that I had been made a member of the
graduate faculty. So I considered that a very
positive sign. I didn't think they would put
someone on the graduate faculty that they were
about to fire. And then, simultaneously with the
meeting of the tenure and promotion committee
which consisted of all the full professors in the
department there was a curriculum committee that
met and there were two people who were members of
both committees one was dr nance and one was dr hall
the curriculum committee at this time assigned me
a graduate course cultural history from the
beginning to 1865 history 625 And I was to work out a
course outline, a bibliography.
And I thought that this was a very positive sign
because it would meet this requirement that I
teach something besides History 105 and 106. I
thought, as a matter of fact, they had purposely
gone out of their way to cover that. So you felt
probably very relieved at that time. Well, I
interpreted it positively, but there was still
considerable anxiety. I see. Because I knew that
the committee had met, the Promotion and Tenure
Committee met. It must have been early in December
of 1972. Can you tell us who was on this committee?
All the full professors, which, you want them by
name? You might go ahead. All right. It would have
been Dr. Nance, Claude Hall, Herb Lang, Haskell
Monroe, Betty Underberger, Tom Miller, Alan
Ashcraft, and Lloyd Taylor.
Six of those voted. Dr. Nance and Haskell Monroe
excused themselves.
But the decision had been made, and I knew it had
been made, but they were not telling. Nobody was
telling. So I approached Dean Maxwell just on the
verge of a Christmas vacation because I was going
to attend the American Historical Association
convention in New Orleans and I wanted to know so
that I knew how seriously I had to pursue John
Prospects. And the dean claimed that he didn't
know what the decision was yet. I see. And he
wouldn't tell me. So I went to the convention not
knowing. Dr. Unterberger rode with me to New
Orleans, and she would not reveal the decision.
I placed you handicapped at a place where, well,
the slave market may be dead, but at least there are
some jobs available. Well, at least I could have
made some effort. Yes, that's what's
interesting. Well, go on. What happened after
that? Well, I returned... not having very
seriously pursued the job thing, because I really
felt fairly confident. I thought I had done a good
job at Texas A&M. But I needed to know, definitely.
So the second day of the semester, the second
semester, in January of 1973, I went to Dean
Maxwell's office. I had an appointment. And I
said, I want to know. told me that the decision was
negative. And for about the next three months, I
walked around in a state of shock. I see. I did not
miss a class. My students didn't know what had
happened to me. And so I went right on functioning.
About the first action that I had the presence of
mind to take was in February, I made an appointment
with Dr. Williams and told him that I didn't expect
him to upset the whole system by going back and
reversing the decision. but that I would like for
him to find me some other position somewhere on the
campus because this was my home and I love Texas A&M
and I felt that there was still a service that I
could make to the university. So he asked me to
write a letter making this request and several
weeks later he replied saying that he could not
find anything in the whole system that would
utilize my talents.
Then at the end of February or early in March, I
started a barrage of letters to all sorts of
people. I guess I had to give credit to my father for
being the spirit who stood behind me and said,
stand and fight. He said, your best chance is here
at Texas A&M. So I wrote to... H-E-W, I wrote to the
EEOC, I wrote to the AHA, I wrote to the AAUP, I wrote
to Francis Farenthold, I wrote to many people,
trying to find out what support I could get, hoping
that I could line up a rather formidable array of
support, and then approach the administration
and say, look, let's do something, or I'm going to
train. artillery yes but the eeoc sort of blew the
whole case open i always understood that when the
government hew or any of these agencies
corresponded with you that they never let your
name be known to your employers for feeling some
sort of retaliation so it came as quite a surprised
to me when some of my friends in the history
department acted very icy, virtual icicles in the
air. And the whole thing back of it was that the
Equal Employment Opportunities Commission had
sent a form to President Williams giving my name
and saying that a complaint had been filed in my
name. on a charge of sex discrimination. And he had
circulated this to the dean and to the history
department. And they considered this not really
playing very fair, going, squealing at the
government.
Actually,
I hadn't filed the complaint. All I had done was to
write a letter stating, this is what happened to
me. Can you help me? But on the basis of my letter of
inquiry, they had informed the whole
administration, so there was really nothing to do
but to go ahead and notarize that formal
complaint. I think this was probably a good thing.
Well, yeah, it forced my hand earlier than I had
expected, but it worked out well. Certainly. And
not very long after that, I employed an attorney.
How did you go about selecting an attorney? Well,
again, I have to give my father credit. They spend
their winters in southern Texas. On their return
to Ohio, my dad had been reading the local news
sheet. This was about the time that Sarah
Weddington had taken the case to the Supreme
Court, the Texas abortion law case, and had gotten
it declared unconstitutional. So her name was in
the news. Dad's feeling was that we don't want just
any lawyer. We're going to get a good lawyer.
Somebody who might even have a political stake in
it. Who might get some mileage out of the case if it
ever went to court. So I wrote to both Frances
Ferrentholdt and Sarah, I called Sarah
Weddington on the phone and she took the case. What
was her reaction, her first reaction to the case
when you called her? Did she thank you? had a
reasonable case? Well, nothing could be
determined until I talked to her about it. So I made
a trip over to Austin and talked to her for at least
an hour. I see. I was very impressed with her. I was
very pleased with her as an attorney. She was not
one of these boat rockers that figures walk. Let's
go out for publicity. Let's make as many waves as
possible. All of her counsel was well, let's play
it quietly and not get people's backs up, not put
them on the defensive until there is no other
recourse. There's plenty of time for wave making
if they're totally obstinate. And she must have
felt that I had a case because she took it.
Well, then what was your next step? after you
acquired or retained a lawyer. What was her advice
to you at this point? Just to wait until the Equal
Employment Opportunities Commission made their
investigation and made a report. Plus, I needed to
follow all avenues of appeal on campus because
there was no possibility of going to court until
all other possibilities had been exhausted. But
there was plenty of time for that in the fall.
The Equal Employment Opportunities Commission
said that they were overloaded with cases and they
didn't know when they would get to me, but they put
mine on a fast track. And I expected them here in
June, but it was July when Brenda Becker came from
San Antonio. I talked to her and she talked to
several people on campus. It was sort of
interesting that when she informed the
administration that she was coming, they set up an
appointment with Ray Smith, who is the head of
personnel, which sounds like a very logical place
to send her, except Ray Smith is in charge of
janitors and maids. He's in charge of staff, not
faculty. Right. Dr. Calhoun is the faculty.
So I informed her of what they had done, and I think
that she felt somewhat enlightened by
that revelation. That's interesting. Well, do
you know what transpired between Smith and
Becker? Well, he apparently was the one that she
worked with to get the records. And she told the
university what records she wanted. Personnel
files. And these had to be subpoenaed. And the
university talked her out of as many files as she
requested. I think it finally got down to all
people who were up for tenure in 1972, plus
probably all women on campus, on the faculty. And
then the university opened these files. All
people whose files were subpoenaed had an
opportunity to go and look at their files. So in
August, I looked at my file and found that it was
sketchy. there were things missing, that the
evidence on which they made the decision in my case
was only partially there. Did you inform Becker?
Yes, and also Dr. Calhoun, and my record was, the
gaps were filled in. Almost put back together
again.
Well, it was sort of interesting, every year we
have to make out these Form 3s, which tells what
you've been doing all year. But it was also part of
the instructions. We didn't need to put in things
that we had done every year. I see. And these are the
things that they used to make the tenure,
promotion, salary increases. But they hadn't all
those on file. They had only looked at the most
recent one, which left my whole honest story. I
see.
So, Ms. Becker buried herself in those files and
she told me that she should have a preliminary
report ready by the first of August. No, no, the
first of September. But the first of October came
and of course my phone bell mounted because very
patiently, kept checking with her. And the first
of November came. She was sick for quite a while in
November, and the first of December came. But
just before Christmas vacation, I called her. And
off the record, not for telling anybody, she said
that she was presenting a letter of determination
in my favor. Her superior might change it. The
chances weren't very strong that he would, but he
might. But for my own peace of mind at least, I could
go off to San Francisco to the American Historical
Convention knowing that this letter was in the
works.
Well, they were having a typing crisis.
Apparently they only had one typist in the office
there in San Antonio to do all their work. And so
even though the letter was in the mail, it would be
the end of January before it would get typed. I
volunteered to go over and type it myself.
Certainly. So Sarah Weddington got on the phone
for me. And she had some connections. So it got
typed maybe a couple of weeks earlier than that. I
received my letter of determination on a
Saturday, and of course the administrative
offices weren't open, so I knew before Dr.
Williams knew, and I knew what was coming in his
mail Monday morning. And at that point, things
began to fall into place. Well, what happened
after the administration received the letter of
determination? Well, I guess I should back up a
little bit. I forgot one kind of interesting
episode. I went to see Dr. Calhoun at the end of
Christmas Vacation. Sarah Weddington had
advised me to ask him about summer teaching. My
contract ended May 4th. 31st, 1974. But she
suggested that I talk to him about teaching in the
summer. Well, he brushed that off. He said, well, I
don't know. He said, go back and ask Dr. Gooch to
approach me on this. But he said, my understanding
is that your employment ends, and so that's
probably the end of that. And then I asked him, what
if the government should find in my favor? knowing
that my letter was probably on the way. And his
reaction was, how could they? I don't see any way
that they could uphold your charge of sex
discrimination.
So I smiled knowingly and didn't reveal that I knew
that such a letter was coming. He spent most of the
interview
discussing what he would do if he were me. He was
trying to advise me. To leave? Well, no. I really
appreciated it very much, and I trusted his
sincerity. He gave me a list of several things that
he would do for me. This was an unprecedented case.
He didn't like overturning administrative
decisions. It was sort of almost a matter of faith
that it was sin to change a decision However, I
could ask. And this would be putting him on a
terrible spot. And he wished that I wouldn't put
him on a spot. But since I had exhausted all other
appeals, he was opening a new court of appeals if he
would reconsider my case. And on the basis of the
fact that I had a new chairman and it was a whole new
ballgame, David Morgan, who had been the colonial
historian, was gone, and now they could no longer
say that I was a duplication. On the basis of the
fact that no rules on tenure had been published, no
guidelines, no standards, what do we expect in
people who are being granted tenure? In other
words, you don't have one within the department.
No. A tenure statement. Nor in the university.
That's funny, because it's the first thing the
library did. When we got faculty status over
there, this you will do. This is what is required of
you. No, there was nothing. Not in the university,
not in the College of Liberal Arts, not in the
department. And Calhoun himself published one,
but it was December of 73 when he did it. Oh, I see. It
was December of 73, yeah. So it was a whole year
after he'd been fired that he came up with a
guideline. So adding all those things, he said, go
back and write me a letter stating all these
reasons why I should open up your case again. Well,
before I got the letter written, oh, he didn't want
me to write the letter until he informed me that he
was ready to receive the letter. And before that
happened, they got the letter of determination
from the EEOC.
And nothing happened immediately. But in
February, this is 74, there was a meeting of the
board, one of the quarterly meetings of the board
of directors. And Dr. Monroe had made a statement
in the paper that the board of directors would no
doubt be discussing my case, so I wanted to be there
and hear what they had to say about me. Well, I
didn't want to sit in on everything, so I wanted to
find an agenda and see just where on the agenda my
case fell. So I called Dr. Williams' office to find
out what the agenda was. And they referred me to Mr.
Cherry's office. So I called over there. Oh, I was
referred to Dr. Calhoun's office. Well, pretty
soon the word spread around that Dr. Statham was
looking for an agenda.
And Mr. Cherry called me and said, Everybody has a
right to see this agenda. You come right in
immediately. So I went to Dr. Cherry's office,
looked through the agenda. I was not on the agenda.
And one of the things, this is the annual meeting
where they decide who was to be given tenure, and
they had a list of all the people who were to be given
tenure. Oh, I think I've left something out. Yeah,
I think you're on the punchline. I had been
verbally told that I would, had tenure, and I had a
letter from Dr. Calhoun, but I was not on the list
for tenure, and I wondered why. And this troubled
me somewhat. Well, let's see, there is something
backwards here.
Now, I didn't know yet.
Well, at any rate, Dr. Calhoun called me in, and
immediately.
The instructions were, at your earliest
convenience, come in. He was in a meeting of the
deans, and he came bringing Dean Maxwell, and he
said, what Dean Maxwell has to tell you I think will
make you very happy. If there are any questions,
you can see me after this meeting. but I don't
believe it'll be necessary for you to attend that
board of directors meeting.
So then Dean Maxwell sat down with me and told me
that I had tenure and that all was well. And then you
received a letter shortly after that? Yeah, I got a
letter from Dr. Calhoun. Confirming this. But I
still,
now that the events are, there's still a cart and a
horse mixed up here. Because I was still very
concerned about why I was not on the official list.
No action had been taken. Well, about this time,
there was an initiation of a freshman honors
society, and I was made a member. And Mrs. Smith,
the only woman on the board of directors, was
giving the address, and arrangements were made
that I could be there so I could meet her. And I asked
her if they had discussed me at the meeting. And she
said, no, the issue never came up. I said, well, in
any of the behind-the-scenes meetings was my case
discussed? No, nothing was discussed. So I was
very concerned about this because Dr. Nance and
maybe some others were saying, the case isn't
settled. She doesn't have tenure. The board of
directors didn't do it. And my friends were
beseeching me, why wasn't your name in the paper?
Why weren't you on the list? And so I still felt very
uneasy about it. And so Dr. Calhoun called me in
again and said, isn't this enough? You've gotten a
letter. It's in writing. You have tenure. And
about a couple of days after that, after Dr.
Calhoun and I had a very firm understanding and a
very pleasant conversation, I got a phone call
from Dr. Williams. Why had I approached Mrs.
Smith? Why did I bring this up? He hadn't really
wanted the Board of Directors to know about this.
It's true, the Board of Directors are the only ones
that could grant tenure, but Dr. Calhoun, I had it
in writing it would hold up in any court, wasn't I?
Satisfying. Well, what had happened was Mrs.
Smith, after she gave her little talk, spent the
night at Dr. Williams' house and had asked him
about me. And so he was distressed that I had gone to
the board of directors, or one of the board of
directors, about the case, because he hadn't
wanted to trouble them with the whole thing. That
simply by being here and teaching next fall, I
would have de facto tenure And next spring, next
February, when they have their list, my name will
be on that list. By that time, the board of
directors will have forgotten about the case.
Whereas if he had come into this last meeting and
said, oh, I want you to add one more name, and had
said, here's the name, they would have said,
Bonnie Stadelman, isn't she the one that's suing
the university? And then there would have been a
big hoover-off. I doubt it. Well, that's what he
is. thinking wise. They probably would never have
noticed had they changed the list, saying, we have
a list change here. We've left a name off. Well, he
felt that it would create all sorts of
disturbance. And so... At least they could have
informed you of why they were going to do this.
Yeah. Well, I wasn't. And so I walked into a sticky
situation. Listen to me. It just seems to me it
could have been done For one thing, I doubt that the
board would ever have looked at the entire list of
names. It's usually done by... Well, you see, the
agenda is a very official looking thing. It's a
great big document. And to come in and say, oh, add
this one name. And Dr. Williams, I believe, had
called each of the members of the board personally
about my case after the letter of determination
came in. And his feeling... from sort of an
unofficial poll of the board of directors was,
let's fight it. We don't want the government
telling us what to do. And so he figured that it
would create quite a stir. Who do you think decided
to capitulate? I think this was Dr. Calhoun's
decision. I have to give him credit with being,
having enough vision to be able to change a
decision.
He had a meeting with Dr. Gooch about the time the
letter of determination came in. And then he
called a meeting of all the full professors in the
history department. And I can only report this as
hearsay. But it came from two different sources
that he said, I am an engineer. I have to rely on you
people for determining people's qualifications
in history. I can't make these decisions. And you
people have told me that she's not of the caliber
that we want here at Texas A&M. But the government
looks at her record and says that she is qualified.
And Dr. Gooch comes in as head of the department.
He's more or less an outsider. And he tells me that
she is qualified. Now, what was your thinking on
this? And in turn, each professor had to justify
his vote. And at this point, there was
considerable squirming, considerable alarm
that they might have to testify in court. And many
of them did not wish to be subjected to court
interrogation. would have been much worse than
simply a friendly questioning by Calhoun,
because then there's an opportunity to
cross-examine. Interesting, yes, very
interesting. And Dr. Gooch let it be known that the
administration's case would look very bad in
court. At this time, especially, yes. And he and
Dr. Nance had a very heated discussion in
Calhoun's office over... whether to go to court,
and Dr. Nance wanted to go to court with it.
Again, hearsay.
That's very interesting. And I was quite willing
and ready to take it to court, if nothing else. Oh,
yes, naturally, you had nothing to lose. And with
the government behind me, with those rather
interesting statistics about how few women there
were at Texas A&M on the faculty. And so this is
where it stands now, you don't have to wait until
the board meets again? Well, that's a mere
formality. I see, I see. Could you possibly tell us
any other names of people who gave you support
during this period off the university, outside?
Well, the American Historical Association has a
committee on women, which was in regular
correspondence with me. And there wasn't much
they could do, but they were willing to do whatever
could be done. And this is one of the things that
caused Dr. Williams some anguish, because he
didn't realize that I had been writing to them. And
so it came as kind of a surprise when I had the clear
blue sky. He got a letter offering their good
services and mediating and so forth. I saw the
letter. I read it very hastily. Dr. Gooch has a copy
of that letter. And it seemed like a very moderate
letter. But Dr. Williams' reaction was, this is
meddling. It was unprofessional. And he'd been a
member of the AHA. since he got his PhD and he was
quite distressed that I had appealed to them and
they had jumped into this whole thing.
I had a lot of support from other faculty members,
people who kept checking with me continually, how
is it coming, what's happening.
But the most gratifying of all was the support from
the students. My students were just wonderful. I
received many letters and even more verbal
reassurances that I was a worthy teacher. Well,
when you look at it, really, what other point is
there for you being here? Well, this is my
thinking. This is a university, and without the
students, the whole place is nothing. But
apparently the higher you get in the
administration,
the less contact they have with students, the more
they forget that.
Well, as you look back now over the whole thing, do
you have any
words of wisdom? Oh, I feel much wiser now that it's
happened.
happened to me. I have never failed at anything.
And to come up against a failure at this point in
life was really soul-wrenching. But now that it's
over, I have learned a lot. I am not as naive as I once
was. I am much more aware of political happenings
in a faculty.
I have tested the limits of my strength somewhat
and found that I was a lot stronger than I thought I
was. I've learned a lot about myself in the
process. And whereas I probably don't deserve as
much credit as I get, because without the
government, it wouldn't have amounted to too
much. But nevertheless, I understand that a lot of
women give up somewhere along the line. But I
didn't back down. I wonder, do you hold any of this
against the university per se? Do you still like
A&M? Oh, I still like A&M, yes. And no, bitterness
only is an acid that only corrodes the person who's
holding it. The department under Dr. Gooch is a
whole different universe. It's much warmer,
friendlier. The
members of the department who voted against me are
very civil, friendly even. The issue is never
discussed, and it's as if it never happened.
And I guess most of all, rather than finding that I
was destroyed by failure, I learned what support I
had, what friends I had, and most important, how
the students felt about it. And I think I like to, I
don't know about you, but I like to feel that the
students are aiming at the administration and the
faculty particularly.
Anything else you'd like to comment on? I'll
probably think of something later.